User_Guide/User_Guide.md, before:

# PGx Pipeline User Manual
## Overview
## Prerequisites
### Alpine Access
Links to Alpine for Noobs slides pdf and video:
- https://olucdenver-my.sharepoint.com/personal/tonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?id=%2Fpersonal%2Ftonya%5Fbrunetti%5Fcuanschutz%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FActive%20HPC%20Alpine%2FAlpine%5FNoob%5FIntroduction%5Fto%5FHPC%5Fand%5FAlpine%201%2Epdf&parent=%2Fpersonal%2Ftonya%5Fbrunetti%5Fcuanschutz%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FActive%20HPC%20Alpine&ct=1713981640547&or=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&cid=886f03e6%2D04e0%2Db856%2D85c8%2D0cfc266ce527&ga=1
- https://olucdenver-my.sharepoint.com/personal/tonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu/_layouts/15/stream.aspx?id=%252Fpersonal%252Ftonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu%252FDocuments%252FActive%20HPC%20Alpine%252Falpine_noob_04032024.mp4&ct=1713981744021&or=OWA-NT-Mail&cid=3ef9a4c1-0158-2038-ff66-d146d2aef6d4&ga=1

#### To set up an account on the computing cluster
Create an ACCESS-CI account and email rc-help@colorado.edu to request account
permissions to the ClawLab allocation. 

#### Requesting an RMACC Account on CURC Resources
1. Create an ACCESS-CI account in the ACCESS user portal: https://metrics.access-ci.org/
   - If you already have an XSEDE or ACCESS account, please do not create
   another one – just go to step 2.  
2. Email rc-help@colorado.edu, and request an account. Include the following 
information:
   - your ACCESS or XSEDE username
   - your institutional affiliation (e.g., “University of Awesome”)
   - your role (undergraduate graduate student, postdoc, staff, instructor,
     faculty or affiliated faculty)
   - your department
   - your first and last name
   - your preferred email address for communication  
3. They will set up your account and send a confirmation email.
4. Login to the RMACC OnDemand portal to access CURC resources! The first
   time you login you will be prompted to set up two-factor authentication.

#### Logging in
1. Navigate to: https://cilogon.org/authorize?client_id=cilogon:/client_id/2839765bdb5cabfdae0daa43a6614b13&scope=email%20openid%20profile%20org.cilogon.userinfo&redirect_uri=https://access-ci.org&response_type=code&state=asdfghjklkjhgfdsa
2. This page will direct you to CILogon to authenticate your Alpine session.
   - In the box "Select an Identity Provider," Select "ACCESS CI (XSEDE)"
   - Click the "Log On" box. 
3. This then takes you to the real log-on page: "ACCESS." Input your ACCESS ID
   and ACCESS password. Note: these are not the same as your Anschutz logon
   credentials.
4. This takes you to your CURC On Demand page.

#### Moving around in Alpine
1. At CURC, there is a menu bar with dropdown lists for Files, Jobs,
   Clusters, Interactive Apps, and an image for My Interactive Sessions. 
2. Files is file browser where you can view paths to data, scripts, and output 
3. Jobs is where you can keep track of the jobs that have been submitted to
   the cluster  
4. Clusters, is the dropdown list to access the Alpine shell command line.  

## 1. Clone Repository (Or Download Scripts) to Cluster
## 2. Download CDS Files from NCBI
The current analysis is performed over three groups of primates. The include
6, 10, and 16 species each. The 10 species group contains the same species as
the six species group with four species added and the 16 species group
likewise but with six species added on top of the 10 species group. Each
larger group contains the addition of species evolutionarily more distant
from humans. That is to say that the six species group is species closes to
humans and the 16 species group includes species as far out as lorises and
tarsiers.

This analysis pipeline uses only CDS (coding sequences) fasta files.

CDS files of each species' Reference Sequence need to be updated and thus
analysis rerun once per quarter (4x per year) as NCBI updates (adds and/or
removes) records.

Sequences need to first be downloaded to your local desktop before
extracting the necessary fasta file for upload to the google cloud server.

Use Chrome or Mozilla to download sequences. Safari use will present
problems: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/docs/reference-docs/mac-zip-bug/

When downloading new CDS files from NCBI:

1. Go to https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
2. In the search window, enter the binomial scientific name of a species
   (e.g. Pan trodlodytes).
3. Click on the link with the name of that species. In the "Genome," then 
   "Reference Genome" section, select the "Download" button.
4. In the "Download Package" pop-up window:
    - Click on the "RefSeq only" radio dial
    - Uncheck "Genomic sequences, (FASTA)" and check “Genomic Coding
      Sequences (FASTA)”
    - Rename the GCF zip file at the bottom of the pop-up to reflect the
      scientific name of the species and the name of the assembly (should
      be the reference assembl) (e.g. Mmulatta_Mmul_10)
5. Finally, click download, and place the file in a local (your computer)
    directory that you create called, CDS_FASTA
6. Unzip each file. The fasta file will be in ncbi_dataset/data/GCF_XXXXX;
   it will have an .fna extension.
7. Save the .fna file, change the extension name to .fasta (e.g.
    Pan_trodlodytes.fasta, note somewhere the reference sequence name and
    date of download).
8. If the CDS sequences downloaded do not have a peptide product annotated
    for a gene (sequence), it will not be included in the CDS file.


## 3. Edit `Lemma.sh` (Configure Pipeline)
## 4. Run `Palea.sh` (Execute Pipeline)
## 5. Analyze Results

Commit message:

Add anaconda notes to user guide

User_Guide/User_Guide.md, after:

# PGx Pipeline User Manual
## Overview
## Prerequisites
### Alpine Access
Links to Alpine for Noobs slides pdf and video:
- https://olucdenver-my.sharepoint.com/personal/tonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?id=%2Fpersonal%2Ftonya%5Fbrunetti%5Fcuanschutz%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FActive%20HPC%20Alpine%2FAlpine%5FNoob%5FIntroduction%5Fto%5FHPC%5Fand%5FAlpine%201%2Epdf&parent=%2Fpersonal%2Ftonya%5Fbrunetti%5Fcuanschutz%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FActive%20HPC%20Alpine&ct=1713981640547&or=OWA%2DNT%2DMail&cid=886f03e6%2D04e0%2Db856%2D85c8%2D0cfc266ce527&ga=1
- https://olucdenver-my.sharepoint.com/personal/tonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu/_layouts/15/stream.aspx?id=%252Fpersonal%252Ftonya_brunetti_cuanschutz_edu%252FDocuments%252FActive%20HPC%20Alpine%252Falpine_noob_04032024.mp4&ct=1713981744021&or=OWA-NT-Mail&cid=3ef9a4c1-0158-2038-ff66-d146d2aef6d4&ga=1

#### To set up an account on the computing cluster
Create an ACCESS-CI account and email rc-help@colorado.edu to request account
permissions to the ClawLab allocation. 

#### Requesting an RMACC Account on CURC Resources
1. Create an ACCESS-CI account in the ACCESS user portal: https://metrics.access-ci.org/
   - If you already have an XSEDE or ACCESS account, please do not create
   another one – just go to step 2.  
2. Email rc-help@colorado.edu, and request an account. Include the following 
information:
   - your ACCESS or XSEDE username
   - your institutional affiliation (e.g., “University of Awesome”)
   - your role (undergraduate graduate student, postdoc, staff, instructor,
     faculty or affiliated faculty)
   - your department
   - your first and last name
   - your preferred email address for communication  
3. They will set up your account and send a confirmation email.
4. Login to the RMACC OnDemand portal to access CURC resources! The first
   time you login you will be prompted to set up two-factor authentication.

#### Logging in
1. Navigate to: https://cilogon.org/authorize?client_id=cilogon:/client_id/2839765bdb5cabfdae0daa43a6614b13&scope=email%20openid%20profile%20org.cilogon.userinfo&redirect_uri=https://access-ci.org&response_type=code&state=asdfghjklkjhgfdsa
2. This page will direct you to CILogon to authenticate your Alpine session.
   - In the box "Select an Identity Provider," Select "ACCESS CI (XSEDE)"
   - Click the "Log On" box. 
3. This then takes you to the real log-on page: "ACCESS." Input your ACCESS ID
   and ACCESS password. Note: these are not the same as your Anschutz logon
   credentials.
4. This takes you to your CURC On Demand page.

#### Moving around in Alpine
1. At CURC, there is a menu bar with dropdown lists for Files, Jobs,
   Clusters, Interactive Apps, and an image for My Interactive Sessions. 
2. Files is file browser where you can view paths to data, scripts, and output 
3. Jobs is where you can keep track of the jobs that have been submitted to
   the cluster  
4. Clusters, is the dropdown list to access the Alpine shell command line.  

### Set up Conda Environment
Use the file called `PGx_Conda_Env_Package_List.txt` in the GitHub repository
to set up a Conda environment for the pipeline. Copy this file to the compute
cluster, and set up the environment in an interactive compute job:

```bash

sinteractive -N 1 -n 1 -c 4 --mem-per-cpu=4gb -t 2:00:00
module load anaconda
conda create --name CYPevol --file PGx_Conda_Env_Package_List.txt
```

**Note** the pipeline scripts are written to use an environment named
`CYPevol`. If you use a different environment name (`--name` option in the
above `conda` command), you **must** change the name in the pipeline scripts
to match.

## 1. Clone Repository (Or Download Scripts) to Cluster
## 2. Download CDS Files from NCBI
The current analysis is performed over three groups of primates. The include
6, 10, and 16 species each. The 10 species group contains the same species as
the six species group with four species added and the 16 species group
likewise but with six species added on top of the 10 species group. Each
larger group contains the addition of species evolutionarily more distant
from humans. That is to say that the six species group is species closes to
humans and the 16 species group includes species as far out as lorises and
tarsiers.

This analysis pipeline uses only CDS (coding sequences) fasta files.

CDS files of each species' Reference Sequence need to be updated and thus
analysis rerun once per quarter (4x per year) as NCBI updates (adds and/or
removes) records.

Sequences need to first be downloaded to your local desktop before
extracting the necessary fasta file for upload to the google cloud server.

Use Chrome or Mozilla to download sequences. Safari use will present
problems: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/docs/reference-docs/mac-zip-bug/

When downloading new CDS files from NCBI:

1. Go to https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
2. In the search window, enter the binomial scientific name of a species
   (e.g. Pan trodlodytes).
3. Click on the link with the name of that species. In the "Genome," then 
   "Reference Genome" section, select the "Download" button.
4. In the "Download Package" pop-up window:
    - Click on the "RefSeq only" radio dial
    - Uncheck "Genomic sequences, (FASTA)" and check “Genomic Coding
      Sequences (FASTA)”
    - Rename the GCF zip file at the bottom of the pop-up to reflect the
      scientific name of the species and the name of the assembly (should
      be the reference assembl) (e.g. Mmulatta_Mmul_10)
5. Finally, click download, and place the file in a local (your computer)
    directory that you create called, CDS_FASTA
6. Unzip each file. The fasta file will be in ncbi_dataset/data/GCF_XXXXX;
   it will have an .fna extension.
7. Save the .fna file, change the extension name to .fasta (e.g.
    Pan_trodlodytes.fasta, note somewhere the reference sequence name and
    date of download).
8. If the CDS sequences downloaded do not have a peptide product annotated
    for a gene (sequence), it will not be included in the CDS file.


## 3. Edit `Lemma.sh` (Configure Pipeline)
## 4. Run `Palea.sh` (Execute Pipeline)
## 5. Analyze Results
